Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is part
three of our three-part mini-series on
“power struggles in post-colonial Africa”.
In case you missed them, in part one,
we talked about Mobutu Sese Seko, the
fiery Congolese leader who ruled the
country for more than three decades.
In part two, we talked about the time
that the son of a British Prime Minister
and an ex-Etonian mercenary teamed up
to launch a coup in Equatorial Guinea.
And in today’s episode, part three, we
are going to explore what’s known as the
Angolan Model, how China has reshaped
the rules of the game in post-colonial
Africa, trading infrastructure
projects for natural resources.
It’s a fascinating story involving
billions of dollars, geopolitics,
and the debate about whether China
is a partner in African development
or a neo-colonial power in disguise.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
Even the most amateur student
of history will know that wars,
in general, end up being pretty
bad news for everyone involved.
And from world wars to regional struggles,
there have been some horrific wars indeed.
So, when a United Nations special
envoy describes a war as “the worst
war in the world”, well, it is
something worth paying attention to.
This war was the Angolan Civil War,
which went on in various phases from
1975 right the way through to 2002.
It started out as a proxy war as part
of the Cold War, with the Soviet Union
supporting one side, and the United States
and a mixture of other Western powers
supporting the anti-government rebels.
Of course, this is somewhat of a
simplification; there were all sorts
of different interest groups, and the
nature of the conflict changed as it
dragged on for almost forty years.
But, in 2002, the conflict was over,
and the country was in tatters.
The total number of dead is unclear, with
most estimates putting it at somewhere
between 500,000 and a million, while more
than 4 million people were displaced,
⅓ of the entire population at the time.
According to a UN report, 80% of Angolans
lacked access to basic medical care, 60%
had no access to water, and 30% of Angolan
children would die before the age of five.
Yet, just 10 years later,
the tide had changed.
GDP per capita had increased by more than
5 times, making it, on the surface, one
of the wealthiest countries in Africa.
And fast-forwarding another 10
years to today, well, things are
no longer so rosy for Angola, but
we’ll come to that in a minute.
First, let me give you a very
brief reminder about Angola
and some Angolan history.
It’s a large country on
the west coast of Africa.
If you imagine South Africa at the
bottom, then going up on the west
side of the continent, you have
Namibia, and then you hit Angola.
It was a Portuguese colony from 1575
until 1974, and was used as a major
slave trading port, sending slaves
across the Atlantic, mainly to Brazil.
Grim stuff, of course, but we aren’t
talking about that bit of Angolan history.
We’re talking about what happened
after the civil war ended, in 2002.
The country was on its knees.
It had been ruled by a man called
José Eduardo dos Santos since 1979, so
throughout the civil war, but like a few
other characters we’ve come across in
this mini-series, he was deeply corrupt
and amassed a huge personal fortune
while his people lived in poverty.
Dos Santos knew that the country was
in dire need of being rebuilt: schools,
roads, railways, airports, all of the
basic infrastructure that had either
been destroyed in the civil war or
never been built in the first place.
But there was no money to do this.
The World Bank or the IMF were places
where countries could ask for development
finance, and they were typically
happy to provide these kinds of loans.
But they came with strings attached,
there were certain requirements for
what a country had to do in order
to qualify for these kinds of loans.
Typically, this meant increasing
transparency, allowing more
political opposition, and putting
into place anti-corruption measures,
all stuff that World Bank and IMF
economists required any country to
do in order to qualify for a loan.
And for most of the late 20th
century, for countries that
desperately needed development
finance, this was the only option.
Take it or leave it.
But in the early 21st century, this
started to not be the only game in town.
On the other side of the
world, the Chinese economy was
growing at breakneck speed.
China doesn’t have particularly large
oil reserves, especially compared to
its population and its energy needs,
and since 1993, it has been a net
importer of oil, buying oil from all
over the world to meet its needs.
China had plenty of US dollars, given its
increasing exports to the United States.
So Chinese policymakers
proposed a solution.
China would lend Angola the money
it needed to rebuild the country, at
fair, even below-market interest rates.
And it wouldn’t ask questions
about making steps towards
democracy or anti-corruption.
China was not going to interfere in the
domestic affairs of another country.
But, it did want something in return.
Oil.
See, Angola has vast oil reserves - an
estimated 9 billion barrels worth.
The deal would be structured broadly
as follows: China would give Angola
the money it so desperately needed,
and in return, Angola would be
required to sell China a certain
number of barrels of oil every month.
The money was to be spent on certain
pre-agreed-upon infrastructure projects,
like roads, hospitals, and housing, and
there was typically a condition that a
certain percentage of the work would need
to be carried out by Chinese companies.
For China, it looked to
be a pretty good deal.
It was securing a source of future oil
imports, it was generating work for
Chinese companies, and, on an important
but less tangible level, it was forging
a commercial and political alliance.
And this, if it worked well, could
become a blueprint for deals with
other countries, and a way of
securing influence in areas China had
traditionally not shown much interest in.
In 2004, the first loan
agreement was signed.
A mere $2 billion, with a guarantee
of 40,000 barrels per day, but
this was quickly followed by more.
In the following 14 years, there were
an estimated 43 billion dollars worth
of loans provided by China to Angola.
And for much of this period, it seemed
to be a textbook example of a new
development model - one that, in many
ways, was truly mutually beneficial.
China became Angola’s top customer,
overtaking the United States.
Oil production doubled, roads,
hospitals, and housing sprang
up all over the country, and the
Angolan economy grew at 11% a year.
By 2012, Chinese nationals had
become the largest immigrant group
in Angola, with an estimated 300,000
Chinese workers in the country.
There were still concerns around
corruption and nepotism, President
Dos Santos had handed over control
of several of the state-run telecoms
and energy companies to his daughter,
Isabel, who has been accused of
being just as corrupt as her father.
As a quick side note, Isabel Dos Santos
was found to be the owner of a bunch of
Malta-based companies that are accused of
being used to steal money from the Angolan
state, so I always find it interesting to
see how these kinds of stories have a link
back to this little Mediterranean island.
If you’d like to listen to more
episodes about Maltese corruption,
I’ll put a link in the description
where you can find those.
Now, stuff was being built all over
Angola, in economic terms, Angola was
producing much more and there was much
more money flowing into the country.
But how did this translate into the
day-to-day lives of the average Angolan?
Well, things did get better.
The average life expectancy went from 47
in 2002 to 62 today, healthcare spending
went from $29 per person in 2002 to
$143 in 2013, on pretty much all major
indicators, things got better, not worse.
Bundled all together and looked at in the
UN’s “Human Development Index”, Angola
went from 0.44 in 2002 to 0.59  in 2015.
This is all a positive development, but
there are a few things worth clarifying.
Firstly, it was starting from a
serious low, an awful civil war
that had ravaged the country.
It was starting from practically
rock bottom, so it would have been
very surprising if it had got worse.
And secondly, this growth wasn’t much
different from many other sub-Saharan
African countries at a similar
time, countries that hadn’t received
any similar Chinese-backed loans.
And thirdly, in 2014, something happened
that brought it all crashing down.
The oil price plummeted, dropping 70%
between the middle of 2014 and 2016.
Angola still needed to provide China
with the same amount of oil, but it was
getting paid less, up to 70% less, for
each barrel, meaning it would need to
send China more than double the amount
of oil to be paid the same as before.
Now, it could have gone
the other way, of course.
If the oil price had doubled, then
Angola would have been paid double for
the same amount oil, it could have paid
off the loan in half the time, and been
in an even more fortunate position.
But that didn’t happen.
And because the Angolan economy had
become so dependent on this “easy money”
from oil exports, there had been minimal
investment in anything other than the
energy sector, which accounted for
around 70% of the entire Angolan economy.
This placed the country in a bit
of a bind, some serious difficulty.
Its ability to pay back its loans
to China is highly dependent on
the global oil price, something
over which it has zero control.
It failed to diversify its economy in
any real way, so when the oil price
fell, it was in serious trouble.
And because the money was so easy
during the first few years of the
agreement, there was little investment
in oil production facilities or
in exploration for new oil fields.
Fast forward a few years, and Angola
has found that its energy industry,
with its ageing equipment and lack of
investment, simply isn’t able to produce
as much oil as it was 10 years ago.
From 2019 to 2023, Angola’s oil production
actually fell by 22%, and this is all
at a time when global oil prices are
much lower than they were in the early
years of the oil-backed Chinese loans.
So Angola is exporting less, and being
paid less for what it does export.
Now, what is the impact of all of this?
In the grand scheme of things, it’s of
little importance for China; Angola was
one of China’s biggest sources of oil,
accounting for almost 30% of oil imports
in 2010, but China has since diversified,
opting for more reliable partners.
Angola is now only just in
the top 10 of the list of
biggest oil exporters to China.
But all of this matters a lot for Angola,
for whom China is still the largest
export customer by a large margin.
And given the terms of the loan and the
reduction in Angola’s oil production
capacity, a considerable proportion
the oil that Angola is able to export
needs to go to China; meaning it
can’t be sold on the open market.
In 2017, when Dos Santos finally stepped
down as President, one of the big policy
moves of the new president was to distance
himself from China, and what had come
to be called the Angolan Model, instead,
turning towards the United States.
By this time, economic growth
in Angola had stagnated.
There were glittering new highways and
apartment buildings across the country,
but they had been mainly built by Chinese
companies and Chinese contractors,
most of whom had left the country.
There simply wasn’t the expertise
within the Angolan workforce to
continue the momentum that was built
up during this period, nor was there
the extra financing to support it.
And bringing it forward to today,
Angola’s GDP per capita has decreased
by more than 50% from its 2014 highs,
and it's now back where it was in 2006.
Now, to the critics of this “Angolan
Model”, they have been quick to
stand up and say, “I told you so, of
course, providing tens of billions
of dollars to a country with weak
institutions and endemic corruption
would be a recipe for disaster”.
These critics also pointed at the
fact that the infrastructure projects
in the country would be completed
by Chinese companies with Chinese
workers, thereby doing little to
upskill the Angolan workforce, or put
money back into the local economy.
Chinese workers would be flown in,
they would send money back to China,
and there was very little trickle-down
effect into the local economy.
Then there’s the question
of who really benefited.
While ordinary Angolans saw some
gains, the elite, like dos Santos, his
daughter Isabel, and their cronies,
they siphoned off staggering sums.
Isabel Dos Santos’ empire, with its
shady Malta-based companies, became
a symbol of how the system enriched
a few while leaving most behind.
The Chinese loans certainly
didn’t cause this corruption,
but they didn’t help either.
By turning a blind eye, so the critics
argue, China enabled a system where
billions vanished into offshore accounts.
However, on the other side,
there are those who argue this
is a serious simplification.
Given that the Chinese loans were
tied to infrastructure projects, and
the money went from Chinese banks to
Chinese companies, there was actually
less potential for corruption than there
would have been with ordinary cash loans.
Yes, because we are talking about tens
of billions of dollars in a highly
corrupt country with weak institutions,
of course, there would be a little
bit of corruption, but the structure
of these infrastructure-backed loans
meant it was harder for money to end
up in a government official’s pocket.
And as to the question of these
loans requiring Angola to use Chinese
companies, well, of course, a country
would prefer to give contracts to its
own companies, it would be strange,
irresponsible perhaps, if it didn’t.
And China didn’t force the Angolan
government to take this loan.
In fact, Angola had tried to get loans
from the IMF and the World Bank, but
Dos Santos didn’t like the requirements
of the loan: increased transparency
and anti-corruption measures.
Angola had two options: the
IMF route or the China route.
It made its choice, and China shouldn’t be
blamed or held responsible when its terms
were perfectly clear from the outset.
So, what’s the verdict
on the Angolan Model?
It’s tempting to call it a
failure, but that’s too simplistic.
For a decade, it transformed Angola,
pulling it from the ashes of civil
war into a brief moment of prosperity.
But it highlighted the risks of the
so-called Resource Curse, when a country
gets so used to funds flowing in from
a commodity that literally flows out
of the ground that it fails to take any
real steps to prepare for a rainy day.
Across Africa, the Angolan
Model has left a mixed legacy.
Countries like Zambia and Kenya, which
signed similar deals, are now grappling
with their own Chinese debt burdens.
To some critics, both Angolan and
external, this is colonialism 2.0, the
dangling of a tempting carrot in front
of a resource-rich but cash-poor nation.
But to others, China builds where the
West only preaches, it is better to
leave a country with roads, hospitals
and airports than to hand out cash that
will only end up in an official’s pocket.
Angola’s experience is a cautionary
tale, but it’s also a reminder
that development is never easy.
There’s no such thing as a
free lunch, especially not when
someone asks you to pass the oil.
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on the Angolan Model, and with it comes
the end of this three-part mini-series on
power struggles in post-colonial Africa.
In case you missed them, part one
was on the leopard-skin hat-wearing
dictator of the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Mobutu Sese Soko, and
part two was on the foiled plot to
launch a coup in Equatorial Guinea.
A bit of a mixture, I know,
but I hope you enjoyed them.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.